---
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: Learning Python for Data Analysis
description: Data Analytics Using Python - Learn how to collect, manipulate, and organise data.
date: 2022-05-28T23:00:00.000Z
featuredImage: /media/uploads/test.jpg
---

### <u>Role & Purpose of Penetration Testing</u> <br><br>

Penetration testing can be considered as a legally authorized attempt to successfully find and exploit computer systems and networks, with the purpose of improving security and mitigating imminent threats. The routine involves probing for vulnerabilities and providing evidence of the potential damage and risks associated with the results. Upon completion of the testing, there should be specific recommendations provided to address and fix any issues that have been discovered (Whitaker and Newman, 2005).<br><br>


It is said that the best way to stop a criminal, is to think like a criminal. Installing an alarm and adding a wall is simply not enough to prevent determined groups or individuals from gaining access. To effectively stop such threats, you must predict the moves that an attacker would make (Engebretson, 2013). One of the best ways to do this is by hiring trusted third party security firms to penetrate the desired systems and provide a full assessment. By simulating a live attack, organizations can witness the possible outcomes of a malicious entity gaining entry or causing damage to their assets. With threats constantly evolving, security should be viewed as a journey. There are new ways to exploit vulnerabilities being devised each day, so even the most rigorous of testing routines can only offer a snapshot of a systems security. Penetration testing is simply a healthy component of risk assessment and best practices, it should not be used as the primary method for determining security protocols (NCSC, 2017).<br><br>


Before a pen test can begin, testers and their clients should agree on the overall scope and desired goal. They will need to decide on the types of tests, which members of their team will be aware of the scenario, the amount of information and what level of access the testers will start with (HelpSystems, 2021). There are black box, white box and gray box tests. Black box tests are simulating an external attack, it will demonstrate how an outsider would breach defenses and usually requires automation, brute force and excellent knowledge of network topology. Sometimes referred to as clear box, white box gives access to internal architecture from the beginning. It looks at what harm can be done from inside the system, agents have a deeper understanding of the data flow and could be provided source code or admin accounts. Gray box is thought of as middle ground where the security team will replicate an external threat, however they may already have partial knowledge of the system or access to basic user privileges from the start (Whitaker and Newman, 2005).<br><br>


The first step in any test is the reconnaissance phase, here the ethical hacker will spend their time gathering crucial data and information that will be used during the simulated attack. This data could be scraped from online platforms such as social media pages, or it could be the responses from a phishing campaign and other predatory activity. Things like names, job titles, email addresses, key dates and location information all hold a great amount of value (HelpSystems, 2021). Account details and password cracking dictionaries can be pieced together using traces of personal details that are found online. The more information that is collected, the greater chance of success during the later stages.
